In an empire so devoid of color, the vibrantly
red-colored Imperial Royal Guards not only
stood out in their unique appearance but also
in their perfected level of skill in combat.
These guys were the best of the best the empire
had to offer, and they were most likely the
finest trained non-force sensitive soldiers
in the entire galaxy during the empire’s
reign.
There’s a reason they were hand picked by
the Emperor himself to guard his excellency.
And since we unfortunately never see them
properly fight in the movies, exactly how
powerful were the Imperial Royal Guards?
Before we begin, we want to clarify that the
red guards we see get knocked out by Yoda
are not even near the same skill level as
the Imperial Royal guards at the height of
the galactic empire’s reign.
The red guards we see throughout the clone
wars did not go through the same intense training
that the Imperial royal guards had.
Instead they were just senate guards, senate
commandos, and other trained soldiers promoted
by Palpatine based on their loyalty for him.
Palpatine’s main reason for creating the
Red Guard at the time was to surround himself
with guards that were solely loyal to him
above all else, so that he could attend his
alter ego as Darth Sidious and do other secret
things without fear of being spied on or being
betrayed by one of the senate guards who would
have protected him otherwise.
Just to put things in perspective, a single
Imperial Royal Guard would probably be able
to take out 4 Red guards with relative ease.
As the Red Guards were picked mainly for their
loyalty, while the Imperial Royal Guards were
picked for both their loyalty and their extensive
training.
Said extensive training for the Imperial Royal
Guards took place on the harsh, war torn planet
of Yinchorr.
The trainees who attended this Academy were
chosen for being the strongest, most intelligent
and gifted soldiers from all across the Imperial
military.
An initial class consisted of about 40 to
50 students, but only about one or two of
them would eventually graduate from the academy
to become Royal Guards.
They were mainly trained in Echani art, which
was an unarmed combat style which essentially
turned the practitioner's body into a weapon.
Their reflexes were sharpened to perfection,
to the the point that they could even sometimes
deflect a blaster bolt in the heat of battle
with just their melee weapons.
Much of their fighting took place amongst
themselves, with the loser of each fight facing
the possibility of death.
Once they reached a certain point in their
training, they would be greeted by Emperor
Palpatine, who even he himself showed the
soon to be guards with utmost respect, treating
them as if they were his own children.
But then again, it wouldn’t be wise to make
the people who would eventually be tasked
in protecting you dislike you.
So that could also be why he was so respectful
towards them.
Anyway, along with inspecting the remaining
students of the academy, Palpatine then had
Darth Vader arrive and duel with the best
student in the group.
Those who dueled Vader were almost certainly
doomed to lose, but beating Vader wasn’t
the point.
It was more of a learning experience for the
other students as they watched their best
mate get essentially murdered in front of
them as Vader toyed with his opponent before
ending his life by kicking him down into the
abyss below.
The purpose of this demonstration was to show
them that what they believed was the best
wasn’t even good enough, and in a sinister
kind of way, to encourage them to train harder.
That if they were going to protect the Emperor,
then they would have to be almost unnatural
in their level of skill in combat.
It was also probably done to perhaps show
them that even if they were considered the
best the empire had to offer, that they were
still vulnerable to death for their failures.
Many months later, and the very few remaining
students were on course to graduating and
only had one final test to accomplish.
A final test that would be overseen by the
Emperor himself within his chamber.
Two students would enter the chamber at a
time and kneel before the emperor as he was
surrounded by Royal guards and Vader.
After they were praised for their remarkable
successes, they then were presented with their
final test: to fight each other to the death
and the winner will become a Royal guard.
Now the main purpose of the test was to test
the student’s loyalty, as they would be
fighting someone who they have trained with
and been friends with for months, if not years.
But their ambitions for becoming a guard overcame
their long friendship and they quickly fought
as they were ordered, with eventually a victor
emerging.
After being congratulated by the emperor,
the newly confirmed member of the royal guard
would be reminded by Vader that he shouldn’t
ever be sorry for his actions nor should he
ever regret a direct order given by his master.
And if the new guard shows signs of possible
defiance, Vader will hurt them and put them
in their place, reminding them that they are
no match to the power of the dark side that
both Vader and the Emperor possessed.
Anyway, these guards have demonstrated their
level of skill from time to time again throughout
the comics.
For example they were able to hold off an
entire private army of clone stormtroopers,
which were secretly created by a traitorous
Imperial who tried to overthrow the emperor.
They did this with minimal casualties, fending
them off long enough for Palpatine to kill
the rest of them with his force lightning.
Another case was when a single Imperial Royal
Guard literally turned the tide of an entire
battle as he fought against stormtroopers
who were being commanded by a traitorous Imperial
warlord who sought the Imperial throne after
contributing to Palpatine’s death.
This single royal guard cut down scores of
stormtroopers with his vibroblade, with even
deflecting one blaster bolt at one point.
He eventually took out his heavy blaster pistol
and started to duel wield his weapons, cutting
down troopers with his vibroblade and shooting
them at a distance with his blaster.
Nearing the end of the battle he even took
out a TIE interceptor by shooting the pilot
through the glass and causing the starfighter
to crash toward the other stormtroopers.
This single gaurd caused the traitorous Imperials
to retreat, with the commander almost having
a nervous breakdown when he was notified that
an Imperial royal guard was fighting alongside
his enemy.
So on top of their training, these guards
were outfitted with some of the best armor
the empire had to offer.
The armor provided far better protection than
that of typical stormtrooper armor, but it
was also designed to be very flexible and
allowed for great movement.
They were armed with force spikes which could
be used to stun or kill enemies, or in some
cases even torture their victims if needed.
They also were equipped with a heavy blaster
pistol if they required to eliminate longer
ranged enemies.
The armor and blaster were hidden beneath
the guard's long robes, giving a deceptive
appearance that they were only armed with
force pikes.
Along with their physical combat training,
the guards were also experts at dogfighting
in space, being given their own special red
colored tie interceptors whenever they escorted
the Emperor’s shuttle.
They were taught a secret language to use
amongst each other during battle as a means
to keep their tactics a secret from the enemy,
and they were more than willing to die than
give up any information or betray their emperor.
Actually when the death of Emperor Palpatine
was confirmed, a huge portion of the royal
guard committed suicide as they felt they
had failed in protecting him.
Those who did not commit suicide, either joined
an Imperial warlord or sought to avenge the
emperor by either fighting the rebels or Imperials
who betrayed the emperor and sought the Imperial
throne for themselves.
Along with guarding they also were used for
assassination missions, and in some cases
they wore special red colored stormtrooper
armor during special missions.
Royal Guards who were exceptionally skilled
in their training and were discovered to be
force sensitive were allowed to join an even
more elite organization called the Imperial
Sovereign Protectors or the Imperial Shadow
guards.
Within either of these subset organizations
the guards were trained in the dark side of
the force, and were either equipped with a
doubled-end vibroblade or a red lightsaber
pike.